Let's talk about testing custom hooks.
Like one of the big reasons that we actually want to use custom hooks.
So we're going to use Pizza of the Day here.
But it's really nice that we have these custom hooks because they've become extremely easy to test.
And you can make sure like, especially if you have this like important hook that's used in a bunch of places.
Like again, if we're shilling pizza everywhere and we particularly use Pizza of the Day,
we're going to use this in 30 different places in our code bases.
We can test this in various different ways to make sure that it works across various different environments.
Becomes a very well stable and reliable piece of code.
The thing that makes me laugh about some of these tests, though, is they almost always end up being longer than the component themselves.
It's very normal. Create a new file here.
Call it. Use Pizza of the Day dot test dot JSX.
OK, we're going to say import.
Expect. Test VI from the test.
Import render.
From at testing library slash react.
And import. Create fetch mock.
From the test fetch mock.
And then, of course, import.
Pizza. Use Pizza of the Day.
Yeah, for whatever reason, I did this as a name export.
It's so weird that I would do that.
But I did. So we're going to import it that way.
Use Pizza of the Day like that.
Const fetch mocker.
Equals create fetch mock.
All things that we've done before pass in VI.
Fetch mocker dot enable mocks.
There we go. We're going to make a test pizza here.
So I put Calabrese in here.
I think I literally just grabbed this out of the database.
So the Calabrese pizza.
Category. Supreme.
I guess it's a supreme style pizza and description.
I'm not writing all that, so it's just going to be something shorter than that.
So LOL pizza from Calabria.
And image is slash public slash pizzas slash Calabrese dot webp.
And then the sizes is this is the prices, right?
12 dot 25. 16 dot 25.
And the large is 20, 25.
OK, good test pizza there.
Good. So how do you render a hook outside of a component?
Trick question. You can't write a hook really works in the context of a component.
So we're going to say function.
Get pizza of the day.
And we're just going to fake it out.
We're going to say let pizza. Function.
Test component.
We're going to say pizza equals use pizza of the day and return null.
We're going to say render test component.
And then we're just going to return pizza, right?
That should work.
So it's going to create a test component that doesn't render anything.
All it's going to do is just call the component.
We're going to go as far to render the component and throw it away because we actually don't really care what it renders out at the end.
It's going to be null.
But we're going to just keep that pizza variable that it gets back from use pizza of the day.
And we're going to return whatever that pizza is.
What is pizza the first time?
No. Right. Use pizza of the day.
What is it the first time?
No. And then it calls the use effect.
And then that's what we're going to get on subsequent.
So let's write a test of that.
We want to make sure that it's not giving us something weird the first time.
Gives null when first called.
That's what we expect.
Async function.
And we're going to say fetch dot mock response once.
Mock response once.
We're going to say JSON JSON stringify test pizza.
Const pizza equals get pizza of the day.
And expect pizza to be null.
There we go.
It works.
Let's go make it something else.
Use pizza of the day.
We want this to now return.
And there we go.
It expected null, and it got LOL.
So that's not going to work.
There we go.
Null.
Now, you might be looking at this like, this seems like it's kind of weird, right?
That we're faking a component to get a hook out of it.
And I wanted you to see how to do this, because I'm going to show you how to do this.
And I wanted you to see how to do this, because I'm going to show you how to just use the,
what is it called, render hook function, which just does all of this for you.
But I wanted to demystify a little bit as like what this is doing for you.
It doesn't do very much, right?
It's just it's making a fake component.
It's rendering it once, and then it's giving stuff out of it.
That's all that this thing does for you.
But we're going to make this so much simpler now.
Get rid of all this just garbage.
Get pizza of the day.
No one likes that.
And we're going to get this function here called render hook from react.
So instead of render, we want render hook like this.
And then what we want instead is on this line, we're going to say const result equals render hook.
And you give it a function to call use pizza of the day like this.
And then we're going to expect result dot current to be null.
It's got a lot more succinct, right?
This looks a little strange, right?
But at the same time, it's very like, you know, way less code that we have to write.
All this is doing is this is creating a fake component underneath the hood.
And then it calls this function, which is going to call our hook for us.
And then we're just pulling out the results there.
Does that make sense?
Yeah.
Just wondering about the formatting on line 20 with const results in curly brackets.
Is that because you said pulling it out?
Is it a more complex object and we're just taking something called result?
OK, cool.
Same thing.
Yep, you're just destructuring what you get back out of it.
And let's make sure I'm not telling you lies.
But yeah, that passes.
Pretty cool.
I just love the vitest tools as well.
Like, they're just so nice to work with.
It's very easy to run all of your tests all at once or rerun certain ones of them.
Like, let's say I only want to run certain patterns of them.
You can hit F to only rerun failed tests, which I don't have any.
So it's not doing that right now.
You can write a filter.
So let's say I just want I could put like a contact.
And then it'd be like, OK, I'll only rerun that test for you.
It's just a very nice tool to work with.
But it just hit H to show this, and it'll show you all the different things
that it can do.
OK.
So let's add another test.
It's not super interesting that it's just getting null the first time.
So let's write another test here that we make sure that it calls the right API.
We're going to add another one up here under testing library called wait for.
We'll use that in just a second.
Test to call the API and give back the pizza of the day.
Async, I can spell, I promise.
OK, fetch, you can actually just grab that from the top one here as well.
So I'm going to grab that.
I don't even know if this is necessary, if we're being honest.
const result equals render hook, same thing here, use pizza of the day.
I don't know why we're giving an empty string there, you don't have to.
Wait, wait for.
And it's kind of the same way with the one that we were using before.
We were just saying like, hey, wait till this happens and it looks like this.
So we're going to say wait for expect result dot current to equal test pizza.
OK, and then you just expect fetch mocker to be called with API slash pizza of the day.
So let me explain a little bit more on wait for.
It's kind of an interesting API.
Wait for basically says, like, run this function continually until it no longer throws an error.
What does expect do when it fails a test?
Throws an error, right?
So you're basically saying, like, run this expectation again and again and again and
again until it doesn't throw an error, right?
So until this test passed, essentially run this again.
And this one will wait a little bit longer than our other one.
I think it'll wait quite a while before.
I don't say quite a while, but it's going to wait a little bit longer than our other
one.
I don't say quite a while, but several seconds before it actually ends up failing.
So let's see how we did here.
It did work, but let's just, you know, if you did this, it should wait a while.
Yeah, I mean, it's like two seconds there at that time, but there you go.
Wait for is quite nice as well.
Now, like, this is a pretty well-tested little hook, right?
We can now be pretty confident in using this all over our code base that, like, at least
with null and with proper data, it's going to work, right?
So I like that.
You might need to test, like, an error case, like what happens if pizza of the day doesn't
come back with something?
Or what if there isn't one for that day or something like that?
You might have to add some of those edge cases, but at least the happy paths are all covered.
The happy pizzas, as one might say.